# 2012: ANNUAL REPORT

An annual report of Ichi Kanaya, Ph.D. and PineappleDesign.org for
Year 2012.

# PREFACE

At the end of Year 2010 I wrote an annual report for that year by
typing almost-naked HTML and uploaded to Google Site. In Year 2011 I
typed using Apple Pages and uploaded PDF version to Google Site. Since
I had tried both extremes of technologies, I decided to go back to
2010 style, but use Markdown format instead of HTML.

A main reason why I go back to plain text is that I'm going to put my
report on _GitHub_ and distribute it via Git repository. Through many
projects during 2012 I've tried very many communication tools, and
concluded that GitHub was the best way to _communicate_ people at
last.

There are many advantages of GitHub if you compare it to Mail (or Mail
magazine), static web site, Wiki, blog, SNS (Facebook, G+, LinkedIn,
etc.), or any discussion board. For example, you can revise your
document while keeping revision history by using Git, and readers can
_pull_ the latest change from GitHub.

In Year 2011 I wrote the following: _Year 2011 will have been
remembered for another millennium. One of my homeland, Egypt, and
other Arabic countries experienced revolution starting from Tunisia,
and Japan experienced Higashinihon (East Japan) great earthquake and
tsunami which pulled nuclear disaster._

What Year 2011 was. It was an extraordinary year. And, we did many
incredible things in that year too. On the other hand Year 2012 looks
a little bit different. So many people had to _restart_ their regular
years. Physically or psycologically, we needed to overcome something.
We'll be never as same as what we used to be before 2011. Year 2012
would be memorized for the year of _seeking_ in the future.

# RESEARCH ON ART, ARCHAEOLOGY, AND DESIGN SCIENCE

## Art Exhibitions

* Hotel Okura Kobe.

* Pineapple II.

## Scientific Publicities

## Digital Archaeology

* Giza.
* Kharga.
* Saqqara.
* Virtual archaeology.
* VSMM.

## Gyoza.

# EDUCATION

## Introduction to Kansei Science

## Media Engineering

## Film and Animation Course

Okkun.

## Master Thesises

## Doctoral Thesises (Pending)

## Tarachine

## KAIST


# SOCIAL ACTIVITIES

## TEDxKyoto

[TEDxKyoto](http://www.tedxkyoto.com)

## TEDxOsakaU

## JAFOE

## Kodomo Art

## Maizuru

## Talk at Japan Foundation

## CoreVideo.net

## Other Blogs

* Affectology.
* ARCH.SURV.
* Bibliographer.
* 

